How to calculate the min fee of a tx - Closes #1255 (#1318)
LiskHQ/lisk-docs: modules/ROOT/pages/guides/app-development/min-fee.adoc

= Calculating the minimum fee for a transaction
:toc:
:sectnums:
// Project URLs
:url_hello_world: guides/app-development/setup.adoc

> The minimum fee allowed is calculated the following way for every transaction:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For every transaction it is possible to calculate the minimum fee required by using the short formula listed below:
```

 minFee = transactionBytes.length * minFeePerByte + baseFee

> It is directly connected to the size of the transaction object in bytes, after it has been encoded, and to the optional `baseFee` of a transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is directly connected to the size of the transaction object in bytes after it has been encoded, and also to the optional `baseFee` of a transaction.
```

> Luckily, the `apiClient` is capable of doing all necessary steps of the calculation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fortunately, the `apiClient` is capable of performing all the necessary steps of the calculation:
```

 client.transaction.computeMinFee(signedTxWithSomeFee);

> All required to calculate the fee of a transaction is the transaction itself, which is passed as parameter to the `computeMinFee()` function of the API client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All that is required to calculate the fee of a transaction is the transaction itself, which is passed as a parameter to the `computeMinFee()` function of the API client.
```

== Connect the API client to a node

First, create a function `getClient()`, which will return an instance of the API client.

The API client connects to a local node, having the RPC API enabled via WebSockets at port `8080`.

If you wish to connect to a different node, simply update the API URL defined in `nodeAPIURL`.

.index.js
[source,js]
----
const { apiClient, transactions } = require('@liskhq/lisk-client');

let clientCache;
const nodeAPIURL = 'ws://localhost:8080/ws'

const getClient = async () => {
	if (!clientCache) {
		clientCache = await apiClient.createWSClient(nodeAPIURL);
	}
	return clientCache;
};
----

== Calculate minimumFee

> A new transaction can be created with the API client in a convenient way, assuming that the respective transaction asset type known to the respective blockchain application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new transaction can be created with the API client in a convenient manner, assuming that the respective transaction asset type is known to the respective blockchain application.
```

> Generally, a blockchain application knows only about the assets that are part modules registered to the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generally, a blockchain application is only aware of the assets that are part modules registered to the application.
```

> Generally, a blockchain application is only aware of the assets that are part modules registered to the application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Generally, a blockchain application is only aware of the assets that are part of modules registered to the application.
```

> In this example, we connect to the xref:{url_hello_world}[Hello World blockchain application], so we can use the Hello transaction asset in this example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, connect to the xref:{url_hello_world}[Hello World blockchain application], so we can use the Hello transaction asset.
```

> The Hello asset is part of the Hello module which is registered in the 'Hello World' application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Hello asset is part of the Hello module which is registered to the 'Hello World' application.
```

To calculate the minimum fee of a transaction, first create the respective transaction and sign it.

> A value for the transaction fee is already required to create and sign a transaction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A value for the transaction fee is already required to create and sign the transaction.
```

> Therefore, just use some arbitrary default value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, just use an arbitrary default value.
```

> In this example, we use 1 LSK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example below, we have used 1 LSK.
```

> This value will be overwritten with the calculated minimum fee for the transaction in the next step.

Reviewer 2: I think we should avoid the word `overwritten`. That's not an accurate way of describing what's happening.

> This value will be overwritten with the calculated minimum fee for the transaction in the next step.

Author: ```suggestion
This value will be replaced with the calculated minimum fee for the transaction in the next step.
```

.index.js
[source,js]
----
const { apiClient, transactions } = require('@liskhq/lisk-client');

// ...

const calcMinFee = async (client) => {
	const signedTxWithSomeFee = await client.transaction.create({
		moduleID: 1000,
		assetID: 0,
		fee: BigInt(transactions.convertLSKToBeddows("1")),
		asset: {
			helloString: "Hello World!"
		}
	}, passphrase);

	return client.transaction.computeMinFee(signedTxWithSomeFee);
}
----

== Post the transaction with minimumFee

> In the next function, the minimum fee is directly used as fee for the transaction that is sent to the node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next function, the minimum fee is directly used as the fee for the transaction that is sent to the node.
```

> As last step, all above defined functions are called and the calculated minimum fee and the node API response are logged in the terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the final step, all the above defined functions are called and the calculated minimum fee and the node API response are logged in the terminal.
```

.index.js
[source,js]
----
const { apiClient, transactions } = require('@liskhq/lisk-client');

// ...

const postTx = async (client, minFee) => {
	const signedTx = await client.transaction.create({
		moduleID: 1000,
		assetID: 0,
		fee: minFee,
		asset: {
			helloString: "Hello World!"
		}
	}, passphrase);

	return client.transaction.send(signedTx).then(res => {
		return res;
	});
}

getClient().then(client => {
	calcMinFee(client).then(minFee => {
		console.log("Minimum fee for the current transaction: ", minFee);
		postTx(client, minFee).then((res) => {
			console.log(res);
			process.exit(0);
		});
	})
})
----

== Execute

If the script is now executed in the terminal, it will display the minimum fee for the created transaction.

> Also, it will directly try to send the transaction with the minimum fee.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, it will directly try to send the transaction with the minimum fee.
```

> In addition, it will directly try to send the transaction with the minimum fee.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition, it will try to send the transaction with the minimum fee.
```

[source,bash]
----
% node index.js
Minimum fee for the current transaction:  127000n
{
  transactionId: '85d90e6ac5c76538ce0b8625adf5c1db40b6209caceabc4e25cb41232cd1fdd1'
}
----

> If the transaction was accepted by the node, the respective trasnaction ID will be returned in the terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the transaction was accepted by the node, the respective transaction ID will be returned in the terminal.
```

> If the transaction was accepted by the node, the respective transaction ID will be returned in the terminal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the transaction was accepted by the node, the respective transaction ID will be logged in the terminal.
```

[TIP]
====
To verify that this is in fact the minimum fee, try to send a transaction with a slightly smaller transaction fee:

.Reducing the fee by 1 Beddow
 fee: minFee-BigInt("1"),

> Then, when executing the script again, you should see the following error in the terminal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then when executing the script again, you should see the following error in the terminal:
```
